DOC data interoperability and pandas/polars output for transformers (#33788)
scikit-learn/scikit-learn: doc/modules/df_output_transform.rst

.. _df_output_transform:

===========================================================
Pandas/Polars Output for Transformers with `set_output` API
===========================================================

.. currentmodule:: sklearn

> This part of the use guide explains how scikit-learn supports tabular data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This part of the user guide explains how scikit-learn supports tabular data.
```

Reviewer 2: and maybe add "in particular in the presence of columns with heterogenous data types".

Feature Names

> =============

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Introduction of Feature Names
=============================
```
Similar to the next section, this could make it clearer that this section gives background on the introduction.

Reviewer 2: Rather than "Introduction of feature names" I would rather speak of "Propagation of feature names" or "Feature names awareness".

Reviewer: I like "Propagation of Feature Names"

> By default, scikit-learn transformers (estimators with a :meth:`transform` method)

Reviewer 3: what about
```suggestion
By default, scikit-learn :term:`transformers` (estimators with a :meth:`transform` method)
```

return numpy arrays (sometimes also sparse arrays). Because numpy arrays do not provide
names for the indices of axes/dimensions, prior to version 1.0

> the :class:`pipeline.Pipeline` did not know how to propagate features names:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the :class:`pipeline.Pipeline` did not know how to propagate feature names:
```

- The single step estimators did not know how to handle incoming features names.
- The pipeline did not know how to pass features names from step to step.

In practice, a lot of use cases start with tabular data like a `pandas dataframe
<https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/user_guide/dsintro.html#dataframe>`_ or a
`polars dataframe <https://docs.pola.rs/api/python/stable/reference/dataframe/index.html>`__

> which have column/features names.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
which have column/feature names.
```

A first step to support this important use case was made by the addition of the
:class:`compose.ColumnTransformer` in :ref:`version 0.20 <changes_0_20>`.

> It acts as a gateway to apply different estimators on the different features. Most

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It acts as a gateway to apply transformers to features. Most
```
optional nit, it matches more docstring of `ColumnTransformer` ("Applies transformers to columns of an array or pandas DataFrame.") and reads easier for me.

Author: I am not native in English. The important point is that you can specify a different transformer per column. This is not possible otherwise.

Reviewer 3: Ah I think your original phrasing is best then.

:ref:`release highlights 1.1 <get_feature_names_out_release_highlights_1_1_0>`.
When an estimator is passed a dataframe during :term:`fit`, the estimator will
set a `feature_names_in_` attribute containing the feature names. It understands pandas
dataframes as well as dataframes with the `Python dataframe interchange protocol
<https://data-apis.org/dataframe-protocol/latest/index.html>`__ `__dataframe__`.
Furthermore, fitted estimators have the method :meth:`get_feature_names_out`. The
`get_feature_names_out` of a transformer returns⸺you guessed it⸺the feature names of
what `transform` returns.

Introducing the `set_output` API
================================

A further major step to support dataframes in a "dataframe in, dataframe out" fashion was
`SLEP018 <https://scikit-learn-enhancement-proposals.readthedocs.io/en/latest/slep018/proposal.html>`__,
implemented for pandas dataframes in :ref:`version 1.2 <release_notes_1_2>` and for
polars dataframes in :ref:`version 1.4 <release_notes_1_4>`. It introduced the
`set_output` API to configure transformers to output pandas or polars DataFrames.
The output of transformers can be configured per estimator by calling

> the :meth:`set_output` method or globally by setting `set_config(transform_output="pandas")`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the :meth:`set_output` method or globally, by setting `set_config(transform_output="pandas")`.
```
nit

    >>> from sklearn.pipeline import make_pipeline
    >>> from sklearn.preprocessing import OneHotEncoder
    >>> from sklearn.linear_model import LinearRegression

    >>> X = pd.DataFrame(
    ...     {"animals": ["cat", "cat", "dog", "dog"], "numeric": np.linspace(-1, 1, 4)}
    ... )
    >>> y = np.array([-1.5, 0, 0.1, 1.0])
    >>> ct = ColumnTransformer(
    ...     [("categorical", OneHotEncoder(sparse_output=False), ["animals"])],
    ...     remainder="passthrough",
    ... )
    >>> model = make_pipeline(ct, LinearRegression()).fit(X, y)
    >>> model.feature_names_in_
    array(['animals', 'numeric'], dtype=object)
    >>> model[0].get_feature_names_out()
    array(['categorical__animals_cat', 'categorical__animals_dog',
       'remainder__numeric'], dtype=object)
    >>> model[0].transform(X)
    array([[ 1.        ,  0.        , -1.        ],
           [ 1.        ,  0.        , -0.33333333],
           [ 0.        ,  1.        ,  0.33333333],
           [ 0.        ,  1.        ,  1.        ]])

Now the same, but with pandas set as output::

    >>> from sklearn import set_config
    >>> set_config(transform_output="pandas")
    >>> model[0].transform(X)

>            c...

Reviewer: Is this last line here on purpose?

Author: Yes. I think it was because of doctest that complains otherwise.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we could just do instead:

```
    >>> isinstance(model[0].transform(X), pd.DataFrame)
    True

The returned dataframe has the following contents:
```

and then keep the table as raw HTML or markdown

Author: I don't see the improvement over the current `c...`.
Sometimes doctest is a pain. Here, we would like to run the example but skip the test.

Background from https://docs.python.org/3/library/doctest.html:
> The fine print:
>
>    - Expected output cannot contain an all-whitespace line, since such a line is taken to signal the end of expected output. If expected output does contain a blank line, put <BLANKLINE> in your doctest example each place a blank line is expected.

Reviewer: I think the improvement would be to get rid of the cryptic `c...`. 
Maybe a simple fix could be to just add the expected string output instead of the html table? For me, doctest passes locally with this:
```
   categorical__animals_cat  categorical__animals_dog  remainder__numeric
0                       1.0                       0.0           -1.000000
1                       1.0                       0.0           -0.333333
2                       0.0                       1.0            0.333333
3                       0.0                       1.0            1.000000
```

But it actually throws an error locally for `c...`, so maybe there is some difference in the CI version and the line above would require an extra `print`?
If this overcomplicates things, I'm happy to see this merged as is, though. 
WDYT? @ogrisel 

(Note: The table representation is shown by default in the detailed example linked below.)

Author: I prefer the html table, looks so much nicer. Is a single 'c' so irritating?
